Main Page
Welcome to  Wikipedia
From today's featured article
Transportation during the 2024 Summer Olympics and Paralympics  constituted a major challenge for the organisers due to the scale of the event. Over €500 million was invested in improvements to transportation infrastructure for the games. A  mobile app  was developed to facilitate travel by offering a route calculator, and 5,000 agents were deployed at stations and bus stops to assist travellers. A goal of Paris 2024 was to halve the average  carbon footprint  of the  London 2012  and  Rio 2016  games. The organisers estimated that more than a third of the greenhouse gas emissions would be from the transport of athletes and spectators. All venues were made accessible by public transport and bicycle, with 415 kilometres (258 mi) of cycle paths created to link the venues and 27,000 bicycle racks installed. Public transport was extended and services increased. The goal was met, with an estimated 54.6% reduction, representing 1.59 million tonnes of  CO 2  equivalent . ( Full article... )

Did you know ...
In the news
On this day
May 26 :  Memorial Day  (2025) in the United States;  National Sorry Day  in Australia;  Independence Day  in Georgia ( 1918 )

From today's featured list
Top Gun: Maverick , a 2022 American  action drama  film directed by  Joseph Kosinski ,  garnered accolades in a variety of categories , with particular recognition for  Tom Cruise 's  (pictured)  performance as well as its sound and visual effects, cinematography, and film editing. It received six nominations at the  95th Academy Awards , including  Best Picture , and won  Best Sound . At the  76th British Academy Film Awards , The film was nominated for  Best Cinematography ,  Best Editing ,  Best Sound , and  Best Special Visual Effects .  Maverick  received six nominations at the  28th Critics' Choice Awards  and won  Best Cinematography . It garnered two nominations at the  80th Golden Globe Awards . In addition to two  National Board of Review Awards ,  Maverick  was named one of the ten-best films of 2022 by the  American Film Institute . ( Full list... )

Today's featured picture
The  bluespotted ribbontail ray  ( Taeniura lymma ) is a species of  stingray  in the family  Dasyatidae . Found from the  intertidal zone  to a depth of 30 m (100 ft), this species is common throughout the tropical  Indian  and western  Pacific Oceans  in  nearshore ,  coral reef -associated  habitats . It is a fairly small ray, not exceeding 35 cm (14 in) in width, with a mostly smooth, oval  pectoral fin  disc, large protruding eyes, and a relatively short and thick tail with a deep fin fold underneath. It can be easily identified by its striking color pattern of many electric blue spots on a yellowish background, with a pair of blue stripes on the tail. This bluespotted ribbontail ray was photographed in the  Red Sea  off the coast of Egypt.

Photograph credit:  Diego Delso
Other areas of Wikipedia
Wikipedia's sister projects
Wikipedia is written by volunteer editors and hosted by the  Wikimedia Foundation , a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other volunteer  projects :

Wikipedia languages
This Wikipedia is written in  English . Many  other Wikipedias are available ; some of the largest are listed below.

