Contents
Star chart
A  star chart  is a  celestial map  of the  night sky  with  astronomical objects  laid out on a grid system. They are used to identify and locate  constellations ,  stars ,  nebulae ,  galaxies , and  planets . [ 1 ]  They have been used for human  navigation  since time immemorial. [ 2 ]  Note that a star chart differs from an  astronomical catalog , which is a listing or tabulation of astronomical objects for a particular purpose. Tools using a star chart include the  astrolabe  and  planisphere .

History
Prehistory
A variety of archaeological sites and artifacts found are thought to indicate ancient made star charts.

The oldest known star chart may be a carved ivory  Mammoth  tusk, drawn by early people from Asia who moved into Europe, that was discovered in Germany in 1979. This artifact is 32,500 years old and has a carving that resembles the constellation  Orion , although it could not be confirmed and could also be a pregnancy chart. [ 3 ] 

German researcher Dr Michael Rappenglueck, of the University of Munich, has suggested that drawing on the wall of the  Lascaux  caves in France could be a graphical representation of the  Pleiades   open cluster  of stars. This is dated from 33,000 to 10,000 years ago. He also suggested a panel in the same caves depicting a charging bison, a man with a bird's head and the head of a bird on top of a piece of wood, together may depict the  Summer Triangle , which at the time was a  circumpolar formation . [ 4 ]  Rappenglueck also discovered a drawing of the  Northern Crown  constellation in the  cave of El Castillo  (North of Spain), made in the same period as the Lascaux chart. [ 5 ] 

Another star chart panel, created more than 21,000 years ago, was found in the  La Tête du Lion cave  ( fr ). The bovine in this panel may represent the constellation  Taurus , with a pattern representing the Pleiades just above it. [ 6 ] 

A star chart drawn 5000 years ago by the  Indians  in Kashmir, which also depict a supernova for the first time in human history. [ 7 ] 
The  Nebra sky disk , a 30 cm wide bronze disk dated to 1600 BC, bears gold symbols generally interpreted as a sun or full moon, a lunar crescent, several stars including the Pleiades cluster and possibly the Milky Way.

Antiquity
The oldest accurately dated star chart appeared in ancient  Egyptian astronomy  in 1534 BC. [ 8 ]  The  earliest known star catalogues  were compiled by the ancient  Babylonian astronomers  of  Mesopotamia  in the late 2nd millennium BC, during the  Kassite Period  ( ca.  1531–1155 BC). [ 9 ] 
The oldest records of  Chinese astronomy  date to the  Warring States period  (476–221 BC), but the earliest preserved Chinese star catalogues of astronomers  Shi Shen  and  Gan De  are found in the 2nd-century BC  Shiji  by the  Western Han  historian  Sima Qian . [ 10 ]  The  oldest Chinese graphical representation of the night sky  is a  lacquerware  box from the 5th-century BC  Tomb of Marquis Yi of Zeng , although this depiction shows the positions of the  Chinese constellations  by name and does not show individual stars. [ 11 ] 

The  Farnese Atlas  is a 2nd-century AD  Roman copy  of a  Hellenistic era   Greek statue  depicting the  Titan   Atlas  holding the  celestial sphere  on his shoulder. It is the oldest surviving depiction of the  ancient Greek  constellations, and includes grid circles that provide coordinate positions. Because of  precession , the positions of the constellations slowly change over time. By comparing the positions of the 41 constellations against the grid circles, an accurate determination can be made of the  epoch  when the original observations were performed. Based upon this information, the constellations were catalogued at  125 ± 55 BC . This evidence indicates that the  star catalogue  of the 2nd-century BC Greek astronomer  Hipparchus  was used. [ 12 ] 

A  Roman era  example of a graphical representation of the night sky is the  Ptolemaic Egyptian   Dendera zodiac , dating from 50 BC. This is a bas relief sculpting on a ceiling at the  Dendera Temple complex . It is a  planisphere  depicting the  zodiac  in graphical representations. However, individual stars are not plotted. [ 13 ] 

Medieval
The oldest surviving manuscript star chart was the  Dunhuang Star Chart , dated to the  Tang dynasty  (618–907) and discovered in the  Mogao Caves  of  Dunhuang  in  Gansu ,  Western China  along the  Silk Road . This is a scroll 210 cm in length and 24.4 cm wide showing the sky between  declinations  40° south to 40° north in twelve panels, plus a thirteenth panel showing the northern circumpolar sky. A total of 1,345 stars are drawn, grouped into 257  asterisms . The date of this chart is uncertain, but is estimated as 705–10 AD. [ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] 

During the  Song dynasty  (960–1279), the Chinese astronomer  Su Song  wrote a book titled  Xin Yixiang Fa Yao  (New Design for the Armillary Clock) containing five maps of 1,464 stars. This has been dated to 1092. In 1193, the astronomer  Huang Shang  prepared a planisphere along with explanatory text. It was engraved in stone in 1247, and this chart still exists in the Wen Miao temple in  Suzhou . [ 15 ] 

In  Muslim astronomy , the first star chart to be drawn accurately was most likely the illustrations produced by the Persian astronomer  Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi  in his 964 work titled  Book of Fixed Stars . This book was an update of parts VII.5 and VIII.1 of the 2nd century  Almagest  star catalogue by  Ptolemy . The work of al-Sufi contained illustrations of the constellations and portrayed the brighter stars as dots. The original book did not survive, but a copy from about 1009 is preserved at the  Oxford University . [ 14 ] [ 15 ] 

Perhaps the oldest European star map was a parchment manuscript titled  De Composicione Spere Solide . It was most likely produced in  Vienna ,  Austria  in 1440 and consisted of a two-part map depicting the constellations of the northern celestial hemisphere and the  ecliptic . This may have served as a prototype for the oldest European printed star chart, a 1515 set of woodcut portraits produced by  Albrecht Dürer  in  Nuremberg ,  Germany . [ 17 ] 

Early modern
During the European  Age of Discovery , expeditions to the southern hemisphere began to result in the addition of new constellations. These most likely came from the records of two Dutch sailors,  Pieter Dirkszoon Keyser  and  Frederick de Houtman , who in 1595 traveled together to the  Dutch East Indies . Their compilations resulted in the 1601 globe of  Jodocus Hondius , who added 12 new southern constellations. Several other such maps were produced, including  Johann Bayer 's  Uranometria  in 1603. [ 18 ]  The latter was the first atlas to chart both celestial hemispheres and it introduced the  Bayer designations  for identifying the brightest stars using the Greek alphabet. The  Uranometria  contained 48 maps of Ptolemaic constellations, a plate of the southern constellations and two plates showing the entire northern and southern hemispheres in stereographic polar projection. [ 19 ] 

Polish astronomer  Johannes Hevelius  published his Firmamentum Sobiescianum star atlas posthumously in 1690. It contained 56 large, double page star maps and improved the accuracy in the position of the southern stars. He introduced 11 more constellations, including  Scutum ,  Lacerta , and  Canes Venatici .

Modern
In 1824  Sidney Hall  produced a set of star charts called  Urania's Mirror . They are illustrations based on  Alexander Jamieson 's  A Celestial Atlas , but the addition of holes punched in them allowed them to be held up to a light to see a depiction of the constellation's stars.

See also
References
External links
Star charts
