Contents
Kythira
Kythira  ( / k ɪ ˈ θ ɪər ə ,   ˈ k ɪ θ ɪr ə /   kih- THEER -ə,  KITH -irr-ə ;  Greek :  Κύθηρα   [ˈciθira] ), also transliterated as  Cythera ,  Kythera  and  Kithira , [ a ]  is an  island in Greece  lying opposite the south-eastern tip of the  Peloponnese  peninsula. It is traditionally listed as one of the seven main  Ionian Islands , although it is distant from the main group. Administratively, it belongs to the  Islands  regional unit, which is part of the  Attica  region, despite its distance from the  Saronic Islands , around which the rest of Attica is centered. As a municipality, it includes the island of  Antikythera  to the south.

The island is strategically located between the Greek mainland and  Crete , and from ancient times until the mid-19th century was a crossroads of merchants, sailors, and conquerors. As such, it has had a long and varied history and has been influenced by many civilizations and cultures. This is reflected in its architecture (a blend of traditional,  Aegean  and  Venetian  elements), as well as the traditions and customs, influenced by centuries of coexistence of the Greek, and  Venetian  cultures.

Administration
Kythira and the nearby island of  Antikythira  were separate municipalities until they were merged at the 2011 local government reform; the two islands are now municipal units of Kythira municipality. [ 3 ]  The municipality has an area of 300.023 km 2 , the municipal unit 279.593 km 2 . [ 4 ]   The province of Kythira ( Greek :  Επαρχία Κυθήρων ) was one of the  provinces  of  Lakonia , then of  Argolis and Korinthia , then of Attica Prefecture from 1929 to 1964. Then from 1964 to 1972 Kythira became part of the newly establishment  Piraeus Prefecture  and after dissolution of Piraeus prefecture returned to  Attica Prefecture  as part of Piraeus prefecture (Νομαρχία). It was abolished in 2006. From 2011 it is part of the   Islands  regional unit of  Attica region .

History
Pre-classical and ancient
There are archaeological remains from the  Helladic period , contemporary with the  Minoans . [ 5 ]  There is archaeological evidence of Kythiran trade as far as Egypt and Mesopotamia.

Kythira had a  Phoenician  colony in the early archaic age; the sea-snail which produces  Tyrian purple  is native to the island. [ citation needed ]  Xenophon refers to a Phoenician Bay in Kythira ( Hellenica  4.8.7, probably Avlemonas Bay on the eastern side of the island). The archaic Greek city of Kythira was at Scandea on Avlemonas; its ruins have been excavated. Its acropolis, now Palicastro (Palaeocastron, "Old Fort"), has the  temple of Aphrodite Ourania , who may well represent a Phoenician cult of  Astarte .

In classical times, Kythira was part of the territory of several larger city-states. Sparta took the island from Argos early in the sixth century BC, and ruled it under a  kytherodíkes  (kυθηροδίκης, "judge on Kythira"), in Thucydides' time [4,53,3]; Athens occupied it three times when at war with Sparta (in 456 BC during her  first war with Sparta and the Peloponnesians ; from 424 to 410 BC, through most of the great  Peloponnesian War ; and from 393 to 387/386BC, during the  Corinthian War  against Spartan dominance) and used it both to support her trade and to raid Laconia.

Kythira was independent, and issued her own coins in 195 BC after the Achaean defeat of Sparta. In Augustus' time, it was again subject to Sparta, being the property of  Gaius Julius Eurycles , who was both a Spartan magnate and a Roman citizen.

By this time, the Greek cities were in practice subject to the  Roman Empire . Kythira continued to exist under the Roman Empire and its  Byzantine successor state  for centuries. Christianity is attested from the fourth century AD, the time of  Constantine ; according to her legend, Saint Elessa came from Laconia to convert the island. [ 6 ] 

Medieval and modern
Kythira is not mentioned in the literary sources for centuries after its conversion; in the period of Byzantine weakness at the end of the seventh century, it might have been exposed to attacks from both the Slavic tribes who raided the mainland and from Arab pirates from the sea. Archaeological evidence suggests the island was abandoned about 700 AD.

When Saint  Theodore of Cythera  led a resettlement after the  Byzantine reconquest of Crete  in 962, he found the island occupied only by wandering bands of hunters. He established a great monastery at Paliochora; a town grew up around it, largely populated from Laconia.

When the Byzantine Empire was divided among the conquerors of the  Fourth Crusade , the  Republic of Venice  took her share, three eighths of the whole, as the Greek islands, Kythira among them. She established a coast patrol on Kythira and Antikythera to protect her trade route to Constantinople; Kythira was one of the islands Venice continued to hold despite the Greek reconquest of Constantinople and the Turkish presence all over the Near East. [ 7 ]  During the Venetian domination the island was known as  Cerigo .

Kythirans still talk about the destruction and looting of  Paliochora  by  Barbarossa ; it has become an intrinsic part of the Kytherian folklore. One can easily accept the stories of locals by noticing the number of monasteries embedded in the rocky hillsides to avoid destruction by the  pirates .

Barbary pirates ranged across the Mediterranean waters, raiding ships, coasts and islands, taking booty and slaves for the  Barbary slave trade . Kythira was at the mercy of Barbary pirates due to its strategic location in the Mediterranean. In order to intercept merchant vessels, islands along the trade routes were of course more interesting for pirates. [ 8 ]  In the 17th century the small islands like Sapientza (Kalamatas) south of Messinia (district in south-western part of the Peloponnese), Cerigo (Kythira) south of the south-eastern tip of the Peloponnese, and along the coast of Asia minor, the then deserted islands of Fourni southwest of Samos, and the island of Psara, west of Chios, were all pirate bases. [ 9 ] 

When  Napoleon   put an end  to the Venetian Republic in 1797, Kythira was among the islands incorporated in that most distant  department  of France, called  Mer-Égée . Kythira shared a common destiny with the other  Ionian islands  during the turbulent Napoleonic era, and is still regarded as one of them; it was counted as one of the  Cyclades  in antiquity.

In 1799, the Ionian islands became the  Septinsular Republic , nominally under Ottoman  suzerainty , but in practice dominated by  Imperial Russia . In 1807, the French recaptured the islands, before they were captured again by the  British  in 1809, who set up the  United States of the Ionian Islands , a  British protectorate . The British ruled over the islands for nearly half a century; under British rule, they were governed by a High Commissioner who was granted both legislative and executive powers. During the period of British rule, the city was known as Carigo or Cerigo, a name it had been acquired under Venetian control. After a long period of turbulence in the colony, which even eminent Commissioners as  William Ewart Gladstone  who served in the role for three weeks in the winter of 1859 failed to resolve, the British discussion whether they were a waste of money or a vital overseas possession ended with the cession of the Ionian Islands, including Kythira, to the new  King George I of Greece , who was brother-in-law to the Prince of Wales.

The chief town of the island, Kythira (or Chora, "village"), houses the Historical Archives of Kythira, the second largest in the Ionian islands, after  Corfu .

Geography
Kythira has a land area of 279.593 square kilometres (107.95 sq mi); it is located at the  southwestern exit from the  Aegean Sea , behind  Cape Malea . [ 10 ]  The rugged terrain is a result of prevailing winds from the surrounding seas which have shaped its shores into steep rocky cliffs with deep bays. The island has many beaches, of various composition and size; only half of them can be reached by road through the mountainous terrain of the island. 
The  Kythirian Straits  are nearby.

Kythira is close to the  Hellenic arc   plate  boundary zone, and thus highly prone to  earthquakes . Many earthquakes in recorded history have had their  epicentres  near or on the island. Probably the largest in recent times is the 1903 earthquake near at the village of  Mitata , that caused significant damage as well as limited loss of life. It has had two major earthquakes in the 21st century: that of November 5, 2004, measuring between 5.6 and 5.8 on the  Richter scale  and the earthquake of January 8, 2006, measuring 6.9 on the Richter scale. The epicenter of the latter was in the sea about 20 km (12 mi) to the east of Kythira, with a  focus  at a depth of approximately 70 km (43 mi). Many buildings were damaged, particularly old ones, mostly in the village of  Mitata , but with no loss of life. It was felt as far as  Italy ,  Egypt ,  Malta  and  Jordan .

Communities and villages
The municipal unit Kythira is subdivided into 13 communities (constituent settlements in parentheses):

Climate
Kythira has a hot-summer  Mediterranean climate  ( Köppen climate classification :  Csa ) with mild, rainy winters and warm to hot dry summers. [ 11 ] 

Mythology
In Ancient  Greek mythology , Kythira was considered to be the island of celestial  Aphrodite , the Goddess of love (cf.  Cyprus , another island devoted to the Goddess of Love).  Aphrodite  is said to have been birthed from sea foam near the island. [ 13 ]  Early astronomers were wary of using "venerean" or "aphrodisian" as the  adjectival form  of  Venus  because of their resemblance to  veneral disease  and  aphrodisiacs . Accordingly, "cytherean" was often used based on this mythology until overtaken by "venusian". [ 14 ] 

Demographics
Like many of the smaller Aegean islands, Kythira's population is decreasing. While the island had reached a peak population of about 14,500 in 1864, that has steadily declined mostly due to emigration, both internal (to major urban centres of Greece) and external (to Australia, the United States, Germany) in the first half of the 20th century. Today its population hovers around 3,650 people (2021 census).

Economy
Since the late 20th century, the Kythirean economy has largely focused and, in the process, has become dependent on  tourism , which provides the majority of the island's income, despite the fact that Kythira is not one of the most popular tourist destinations in Greece. The popular season usually begins with the Greek holiday of  Pentecost  at the end of May, and lasts until the middle of September. During this time, primarily during August, the island's population will often triple due to the tourists and natives returning for vacation. Dependence on tourism has resulted in increased building activity in many of the island's villages, mostly for commercial purposes (hotels and hospitality facilities, shops etc.), but also secondary homes; prominent examples are Agia Pelagia and Livadi, both of which having witnessed significant growth in their size since the early 1990s.

Minor sources of revenue are thyme honey, famous within Greece for its rich flavor, as well as some small-scale cultivation of vegetables and fruit and animal husbandry that is, nevertheless, increasingly restricted to local consumption.

Only five of the island's villages are on the coast (Platia Amos, Agia Pelagia, Diakofti, Avlemonas, & Kapsali). During July and August, several traditional dances will be held in various villages. These dances usually attract the majority of the island's population, the biggest of which are the festival of 'Panagia' in Potamos on 15 August, and the wine festival in Mitata on the first Friday and Saturday of August.

Infrastructure
The Trifylleion Hospital of Kythera is the only  hospital  on the island. The hospital's construction was made possible through the contributions of  Greek Americans , including Mixalis Semitekolos, also known as Mike Semet, who was a prominent figure in the New York City restaurant industry in the early 20th century. Semitekolos, an immigrant from Kythera, raised funds for the hospital by participating in a pan-Kytherian  fundraising campaign  in the  United States  in the early 1950s. His significant monetary contributions earned him recognition from  King Paul of Greece  with the  Order of the Phoenix . The groundbreaking for the hospital was on May 21, 1953, in Potamos, making it the first hospital on the island. It remains the only hospital on the island to this day, providing essential medical services to the residents of Kythira and the surrounding areas. The charitable organization responsible for the hospital evolved to become the Trifylleion Foundation of Kytherians and is still active today. [ 15 ] [ 16 ] 

Kythira (town)
The capital, Chora, is located on the southern part of the island having no ports connected to the southern Peloponnese or  Vatika . Kythira's port for Vatika was previously situated at Agia Pelagia, although in recent years this port has been decommissioned and has been replaced by a new port at the coastal town of Diakofti, Kythira.

Most of the over 60 village names end with "-anika" and a few end with -athika, -iana and -wades. This is due to the villages being named after influential families that settled first in that region. For Example, 'Logothetianika' is derived from the Greek last name of 'Logothetis'.

Officially, Greek is Kythira's main language. Despite popular belief, most places such as public services and local administrations, will be able to oblige to an individual's needs in English as well. In specific areas, some of Kythira's population is fluent in Italian. [ 17 ] 

Transportation
The island in the past has been plagued by a poor infrastructure, exacerbated by the effect of weather on transportation during the winter months. [ citation needed ]  However the construction of the new port in  Diakofti  along with the renovation of the island's airport have significantly reduced these effects. A new road from the island's most populated town of Potamos in the north to the island's capital of Chora in the south is currently in the planning and development stage.

Port
Despite the fact that the island has been a trade route for centuries, construction of a modern port was postponed several times until the latter half of the 20th century. In 1933, efforts were made to construct a port in the village of Agia Pelagia, yet financial and governmental problems meant that it was only decades later that one was built. That small port of Agia Pelagia (currently being renovated from a ferry dock to a tourist/recreational boat dock) was the island's main port until the mid-1990s. Around that time the new port of  Diakofti , the site originally chosen by the British colonial administration in the 19th century, was constructed along with a modern wider road, aiming to support larger cargo and passenger vessels. The port of Diakofti currently serves scheduled routes to/from  Gythion ,  Kalamata ,  Antikythera ,  Piraeus ' Athens port, Crete & Neapolis - Vatika. Proposals have been made to attach a marina to the south side of the port, however no plans or timetables have been produced. Additionally, the harbour of Agia Patrikia (north of Agia Pelagia) is the primary fishing boat harbour, housing two wide boatramps and a boat repair facility.

Airport
The island's primary airport is the  Alexander S. Onassis  Airport also known as  Kithira Island National Airport , located in the region between the village of Friligiannika and Diakofti, about 20 km (12 mi) from the capital. The airport was revamped and extended at the turn of the 21st century, largely by private funds provided by the local population. The island is served by  Olympic Air  and  Aegean Airlines  flights.

Notable people
In popular culture
Gallery
See also
Notes
References
External links
