Main Page
Welcome to  Wikipedia
From today's featured article
The  iMac G4  is an  all-in-one  personal computer produced by  Apple Computer  from January 2002 to August 2004. It comprises a hemispheric base that holds the computer components and a flatscreen  liquid-crystal display  (LCD) mounted above. The  iMac G3 , first released in 1998, helped save Apple from bankruptcy. Development of the iMac G4 took roughly two years, with Apple's designers exploring multiple ways of marrying the display screen with the computer components. Its shape was inspired by a sunflower, with the display connected to the base via an adjustable stainless-steel arm that allows the monitor to be freely tilted and swiveled. The product was a critical and commercial success for Apple, selling more than 1.3 million units in its first year, and it was updated with faster components and larger displays before being replaced by the  iMac G5  in September 2004. The machine is held in the collections of multiple museums, including the  Museum of Modern Art  and  Museums Victoria . ( Full article... )

Did you know ...
In the news
On this day
May 16 :  Malcolm X Day  in some parts of the United States (2025)

From today's featured list
There are  thirty listed sites located in the Mackenzie District , a  territorial authority  in the  Canterbury Region  of the  South Island of New Zealand.  A large inland plain at the foothills of the  Southern Alps , it was frequently visited by  Māori  hunting parties, but sparsely populated. European settlers established  sheep runs  in the area by the 1850s.  Heritage New Zealand  classifies sites on the  New Zealand Heritage List / Rārangi Kōrero  in accordance with the Heritage New Zealand Pouhere Taonga Act 2014. It distinguishes between Category 1 ("places of special or outstanding historical or cultural significance") and Category 2 ("places of historic or cultural significance"). The  Mackenzie District  has three Category 1 sites, one historic area, and twenty-six Category 2 sites. An additional Category 2 site—the War Memorial in  Fairlie —was demolished in 1999 and delisted. ( Full list... )

Today's featured picture
Margaret Hamilton   (December 9, 1902 – May 16, 1985) was an American entertainer and educator, with a fifty-year career in entertainment spanning theater, film, radio and television. She was best known for her portrayal of the  Wicked Witch of the West  and her Kansas counterpart Almira Gulch in the 1939  Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer  film  The Wizard of Oz . A former schoolteacher, she worked as a  character actress  in films for seven years before she was offered the role that defined her public image. In later years, Hamilton appeared in films and made frequent cameo appearances on television  sitcoms  and  commercials . She also gained recognition for her work as an advocate of causes designed to benefit children and animals and retained a lifelong commitment to public education. This photograph shows Hamilton as Miss Eddels in  Sid and Marty Krofft 's   Sigmund and the Sea Monsters   c.  1973 .

Photograph credit:  NBC Television Network ; restored by  Adam Cuerden
Other areas of Wikipedia
Wikipedia's sister projects
Wikipedia is written by volunteer editors and hosted by the  Wikimedia Foundation , a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other volunteer  projects :

Wikipedia languages
This Wikipedia is written in  English . Many  other Wikipedias are available ; some of the largest are listed below.

